1. (40 marks)

Create a database in SQLite on managing the IIT Kanpur campus community.  The
members of the community include faculty members, staff, students (core
members) as well as their family members.

Each student will have a unique roll number while each faculty member and
staff will have a unique personal identification number.  The family members do
not have any unique number allocated by IIT Kanpur.  However, you can do that.
Each family member must always be tagged with at least a core member through a
foreign key constraint.  The relationship must also be specified.  They may be
connected to more than one core members.

The records maintained for community member includes address (a must) and a
phone number (optional, i.e., it may be null).  Core members must be tagged to
departments.  The departments include units such as IWD, CC, health center,
etc.

For each department, a faculty member or staff is assigned as the head.  Each
student should be marked as either a UG or a PG student.  Each PG student must
have at least one and at most two advisors.  A UG student may or may not have
advisor(s).  At least one advisor should be from the same department.

The students stay in hostels (separate for boys and girls), while married
students stay in special married hostels.

Design the different tables accordingly.

Specify the primary key and foreign key constraints while creating the tables.

2. (15 marks)

Create csv files with data.  There should be at least 50 members of each type,
at least 20 departments, and at least 10 hostels.  Import data directly from
these csv files.

3. (35 marks)

Using the above database, write SQL statements for the following queries:

(a) Find the number of students who are married.
(b) Find the number of students living in married hostels. Does it match with (a) above?
(c) Count the number of faculty members, staff, students and family members separately as well as the total.
(d) Count the average number of family members per faculty member.
(e) Find if any faculty member or staff is head of more than one departments.
(f) Find the percentage of UG students having an advisor.
(g) Find the number of faculty members advising students from other departments.
