In this assignment, you will implement a  shared  memory  interface  and  demand
paging.  You will test your shared memory implementation by writing a  few	test
programs.

Download cs330assignment3.zip and unzip it in your home  directory.   This	will
create a new directory named cs330assignment3/ and place my  version  of  NachOS
under it.

You should compile and run NachOS only from the nachos/code/userprog/ directory.
You should run NachOS as follows.

> ./nachos -rs s -A n -P p -x ../test/executablename

The -rs option makes the timer yields happen at random points in time. Here s is
a randomization seed (an integer). If you use different seeds in different runs,
the preemption points will be different.  Use zero as the seed value (i.e.,  -rs
0) for reporting all your results.	This is important because changing the	seed
value may change the results slightly leading to potential confusion in grading.
However, feel free to experiment with other seed values, but do not report these
results.  Your implementation should run without any error	for  arbitrary	seed
values.  Here n is an integer from the set {1, 2, 3, 4}  and  p  is  an  integer
between 0 and 100 (both ends inclusive).  The value of n determines  the  chosen
scheduling algorithm and the value of p determines	the  base  priority  of  the
thread. The four scheduling algorithms are defined in
nachos/code/threads/system.h. The quantum used by algorithms 3 and 4 are defined
as SCHED_QUANTUM in nachos/code/threads/system.h.	You  will  use	algorithm  3
(round robin) for this assignment. Set both SCHED_QUANTUM and TimerTicks to 100.
The -P flag is optional unless n is chosen to be 4.  You should specify 3 for n,
unless you are asked to do otherwise.

In the following,  I  will	discuss  the  steps  involved  in  this  assignment.



-------------------------------- SHARED MEMORY ---------------------------------


To	implement  shared  memory,	I  have  introduced  a	new   system   call   in
nachos/code/userprog/syscall.h.  This system call is  SysCall_ShmAllocate.	 The
corresponding function	that  the  user  programs  can	use  is  also  declared:
syscall_wrapper_ShmAllocate().	This function  takes  the  size  of  the  shared
memory to allocate in bytes and returns the starting virtual address  where  the
shared memory region is attached to the calling process's  address	space.	 You
need to use it in the following way in your test programs. Make sure to allocate
all shared memory before invoking any syscall_wrapper_Fork().  Suppose you	have
two  integers  that  you  want	to	share  across  the	parent	and  the  child.

int main () { ...  int *array =
(int*)syscall_wrapper_ShmAllocate(2*sizeof(int));

/* Now you can use array[0] and  array[1]  as  the	two  shared  variables.   */

}

You can make multiple calls to syscall_wrapper_ShmAllocate to allocate different
types of shared memory regions e.g., int, unsigned, char, etc..  Your task is to
implement the SysCall_ShmAllocate system call in
nachos/code/userprog/exception.cc.	This system call should  do  the  following.

It should allocate a new page table for the caller with number of entries  equal
to the number of current entries plus the number of pages needed  to  cover  the
requested shared memory region size.  It  will	copy  the  existing  page  table
entries from the old page table into the new one. It will also allocate physical
pages for the shared memory region and set up the virtual to physical  maps  for
these pages in the remaining entries  of  the  new	page  table.   You	have  to
introduce  a  shared  field   in   the	 TranslationEntry	class	defined   in
nachos/code/machine/translate.h to remember which pages are shared.  You need to
modify SysCall_Fork as follows. On a syscall_wrapper_Fork() call, the virtual to
physical maps of the shared pages are just copied from	the  parent  to  child's
page table and no new  physical  pages	would  be  allocated  for  these  pages;
otherwise	syscall_wrapper_Fork()	 works	 as   already	implemented.	 The
SysCall_ShmAllocate system call returns the  starting  virtual	address  of  the
first shared page within the range of allocated shared pages.  Remember to	free
the  old  page	table  of  the	caller	 and   set	 the   KernelPageTable	 and
KernelPageTableSize fields in the Machine class  correctly.   For  testing	your
shared memory  implementation,	I  have  included  two	test  programs,  namely,
shmtest.c and shmtest1.c in  the  nachos/code/test/  directory.   In  the  first
program, two threads concurrently increment a shared  counter.	 In  the  second
program, the updates to the shared counter are done by one	thread	at	a  time.
You should feel free to write new test programs with more than two	threads  and
more  complex  use	of	shared	memory	to	stress-test   your	 implementation.



------------------------- DEMAND PAGING VIRTUAL MEMORY -------------------------


The current implementation of NachOS allocates the complete address space  of  a
thread when the thread is created.	This is not how realistic systems work.  The
entire executable may not be needed by the thread at the same  time.   You	will
change the implementation such that as and when the first access  to  a  virtual
page comes (causing what is known  as  a  page	fault),  we  allocate  the	next
available physical page, and register this	mapping  in  the  page	table  entry
corresponding to the virtual page.	When a new	test  program  is  started,  the
number of virtual pages is	calculated	from  the  executable  file,  as  usual.
Accordingly, the page table is allocated and  all  entries	are  initialized  as
invalid (i.e., valid is FALSE).  At this point no physical	page  is  allocated.
When a virtual page is accessed for the first time, the next available	physical
page is assigned to the virtual page, the page table entry is changed  to  valid
state, and the virtual to physical page mapping is registered in the entry.   At
this time, the page is zeroed  out	and  the  contents	of	the  page  from  the
executable file are copied into the correct locations of the memory array.	When
a thread is forked, you should, as usual, create a number of page table  entries
equal to the number of page table entries of the parent and copy the contents of
the valid physical pages of the parent into child's physical pages.  Beyond this
point the parent and child will allocate their pages on demand independently  as
and when  accesses	come.	Also,  change  the	implementation	of	SysCall_Exec
appropriately.	In other words, SysCall_Exec will not allocate any physical page
frame, which will be allocated on demand as  the  new  executable  makes  memory
accesses.  It should free the page table of the caller and allocate  a	new  one
depending on the size of the new executable.  It should free  all  the	physical
pages belonging to the caller, except the shared  ones.   These  pages	are  now
available for allocation to other threads.	All memory accesses go	through  the
Translate method of the Machine class. This is where the page table is looked up
to find the virtual to physical page mapping. When a virtual page is found in an
invalid state in the page table, it should be counted as a page fault,	and  the
page fault is handled by allocating the next free physical page and  registering
this mapping in the page table entry.  Your task is to detect page faults, count
them, and handle them on demand.  Your simulation should report  the  number  of
page faults at the end.  Assume a page fault latency of 1000 ticks.  During this
time the thread undergoing the page fault must remain in  BLOCKED  state.	Make
use of the sleep queue developed in the first assignment for this purpose.	When
the process is scheduled again, it should start execution from	the  instruction
that suffered from a page fault.  In summary, the page fault needs to be modeled
as a restartable exception.  Remember to model the page faults	correctly  in  a
syscall_wrapper_Fork() call i.e., the caller may transition in and	out  of  the
BLOCKED state multiple times depending on the number of pages to be copied.   We
are not modeling copy-on-write.

One way to incorporate demand paging in the implementation of SysCall_Fork is to
run a loop over the parent's page table.  Each iteration i of the loop	examines
the entry i of parent's page table and if it is valid, it allocates  a	physical
page frame for the child.  Suppose the virtual page i of  parent  is  mapped  to
physical page frame p.	Suppose the page frame allocated to the child is c.  You
will record the mapping of virtual page i  to  physical  page  frame  c  in  the
child's page table and copy the contents of physical page frame p into	physical
page frame c.

To simplify matters, we will assume that  shared  pages  are  not  allocated  on
demand. Instead, the SysCall_ShmAllocate call allocates all the necessary shared
physical pages. These should be counted as page faults, but no latency should be
charged i.e., the caller will just continue executing.	This is because there is
usually nothing to be copied from the disk at the time of  allocating  a  shared
physical page.

Handling page faults inside system calls involves one  additional  step.   These
page faults arise when a system call handler invokes ReadMem or  WriteMem  on  a
virtual address which is not yet present in the physical memory.  In the case of
a page fault, the ReadMem and WriteMem methods return FALSE.  Depending  on  the
return value of these methods, you may have to	keep  retrying	the  ReadMem  or
WriteMem until you get a return value of TRUE.

In this part of the assignment, we will make sure that the running threads never
run out of physical pages.	In other words, set NumPhysPages to  a	high  enough
value.	Notice that our demand-paged virtual memory model is a highly simplified
version  of  the  reality.	 We  do  not  model  a	disk  or   a   swap   space.



------------------------- PAGE REPLACEMENT ALGORITHMS --------------------------


As NumPhysPages is gradually reduced, eventually a situation will arise when all
the physical pages are currently occupied and a thread undergoes a	page  fault.
This can happen if NumPhysPages is less than the requirement of all the threads.
In this case, you have to  select  one	physical  page	for  replacement,  whose
contents will now be overwritten by the  new  page.   You  will  implement	four
replacement policies, namely, Random, FIFO, LRU, and LRU-CLOCK, and evaluate the
number of page faults returned by each.  Also, at the time of replacing a  page,
you need to do the following things.  To simplify matters, we will	ensure	that
shared pages are never considered for replacement.

Find out the page table entry corresponding to the replaced page and change  its
state to invalid. If the page table entry is in dirty state (happens if the page
is modified by the running program), you have to back up  the  contents  of  the
replaced page so that when the page is needed  later,  it  can	be	loaded	back
correctly.	For this purpose, you will allocate a character array (just like the
main memory array) per thread when a thread is created.  The length of the array
should be equal to the number of virtual pages in the executable  multiplied  by
the page size.	When a	page  is  replaced,  its  contents	are  stored  in  the
corresponding locations of this array.	Now, at the time of a  page  fault,  you
need to know if the contents of the page should be loaded  from  the  executable
file or the backup array.  Introduce a new field in the  page  table  entry  for
this purpose. Initialize this at the time of thread creation to mention that the
page should be loaded from the executable file.  When a page is replaced, change
the field to mention that it should be loaded from the backup array on the	next
fault for this page.  Finding the page table entry corresponding to  a	replaced
page may be tedious.   Think  of  data	structures	that  can  accelerate  this.

We have already mentioned that one way	to	incorporate  demand  paging  in  the
implementation of SysCall_Fork is to run a loop over the  parent's	page  table.
Each iteration i of the loop examines the entry i of parent's page table and  if
it is valid, it allocates a physical page frame  for  the  child.	Suppose  the
virtual page i of parent is mapped to physical page frame p.   While  allocating
the child's page frame, it may be necessary to replace a page if all page frames
are occupied.  You should invoke your page replacement algorithm and can replace
any page selected by the algorithm except the page p.  The reason why you cannot
replace the page p of the parent  should  be  obvious  (you  need  to  copy  the
contents of page p into the newly allocated child's page frame, so you want this
page to be resident in memory). Suppose the page frame allocated to the child is
c.	Once the contents of page frame p are copied into page frame c,  you  should
correctly update the replacement states of these two pages.  In other words,  if
the replacement policy is LRU, the page frame c should be the MRU frame and page
frame p should be the next MRU frame (copying involves reading from p first  and
then writing to c making c the MRU frame and p the	next  MRU  frame).	 If  the
replacement policy is LRU-CLOCK, the reference bits of both p and  c  should  be
set to 1 (or TRUE).

For the test programs that do not use syscall_wrapper_Fork() or  shared  memory,
your implementation should run correctly with just two pages (one page	to	keep
the current instruction and another page for data),  although  there  may  be  a
large number of page faults.  However, your patience will be tested here because
these simulations may take a long time. For example, the vectorsum program on my
implementation takes about three minutes with two frames and random replacement.
The programs that use syscall_wrapper_Fork() and create  multiple  threads	will
require at least two pages per thread.	The programs that use shared memory will
require additional number of pages to accommodate the shared  pages,  which  can
never be replaced as per our design.

Introduce a new command line flag -R followed by an integer from {1,  2,  3,  4}
for specifying the page replacement algorithm according to the	following  list.

1. Random 2. FIFO 3. LRU 4. LRU-CLOCK

If	this  flag	is	not  specified,  the  simulator  should  fall  back  to  the
demand-paged virtual memory system with large enough  physical	memory	so	that
page replacement need not be invoked. This flag should be used as follows, where
r belongs to the set {1, 2, 3, 4}.

>	./nachos   -rs	 s	 -A   n   -P   p   -R	r	-x	  ../test/executablename



-------------------------------- WHAT TO SUBMIT --------------------------------


Report the number of page faults  and  the	total  number  of  ticks  needed  to
complete the execution for each of the following two programs  provided  in  the
nachos/code/test/ directory: vmtest1,  vmtest2	using  each  of  the  four	page
replacement policies.  Report the statistics for the  following  six  values  of
NumPhysPages: 16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 512.  Remember that these results should  be
collected with randomization seed zero (i.e., -rs 0) and round-robin  scheduling
(i.e., -A 3) with both SCHED_QUANTUM and TimerTicks set to 100.   Explain  these
results. Put these tables and explanations along with any other comments related
to the other parts of the assignment in a  pdf	document.	Name  the  pdf	file
groupX.pdf (replace X by your assigned group id).

Note: One simulation of vmtest1 with NumPhysPages  set	to	sixteen  and  random
replacement policy will take around fifteen minutes.  With	more  frames  and  a
better policy, simulation time will go down.  Please be prepared  for  this  and
start your test runs early.

Execute make clean	in	the  threads  and  userprog  directories.	Prepare  the
submission zip ball of your machine/, threads/, and userprog/ directories.	Your
submission at the end of simulation must print the number of page  faults.	 You
are welcome to provide more statistics.

>  cd  nachos/code/  >	 zip   -r	groupX.zip	 machine/	threads/   userprog/

Replace X by your assigned group id.  Send an email to cs330autumn2017@gmail.com
with subject "[CS330] Assignment3" and attach groupX.zip and groupX.pdf  to  the
mail.  The body  of  the  mail	should	contain  the  following  two  sentences.

1.	I have not copied any part of this submission from any other group.   2.   I
have  not  helped  any	other  group  copy	any   part	 of   this	 submission.

All the members of the group should put their names and roll numbers  below  the
statement.
