Sociology is the study of life and society, and studying sociology can allow  an
individual to see through the spectacles  of  society  and	embrace  the  larger
truth.	Sociology has it's effects on many fronts, such as economy, law, as well
as social norms pertaining to gender  and  caste,  and	this  course  helped  me
understand the effect of sociology on these fronts,  on  my  personal  life  and
interests,	and  the  way  I   see	 and   look   at   things	around	 myself.

We have, until now, and  still	do	perceive  society  and	economy  to  be  two
different fronts, yet I believe there is  no  real	understanding  the	changing
economy, without understanding the changing society.  The economy of  a  society
depends on the social structure, and the people in it.	When we  understand  the
needs of the people, and their potential, only	then  can  we  come  up  with  a
structure that resonates the social and economic order.

The different law reforms and agencies cannot operate without sociology.  Law is
the front which requires people to be heard  and  understood,  and	without  the
knowledge of people's backgrounds, their history and their culture, the question
of fairness in law arises. An uninformed decision can have major consequences on
not just individuals, but also the society as a whole. A recent example would be
the Triple Talaq Bill, where the real interests  of  the  people  were	ignored,
making	  the	 decision	 to    be	 more	 of    a	political	 nature.

Understanding the structure and workings of the society are not just integral to
law or economy, but also the  rising  capitalist's	market.   Entrepreneurs  and
technicians completely rely on social  problems.   The	idea  of  innovation  is
directly linked  to  solving  social  problems	and  sociology	is	the  key  to
understanding these problems.

Sociology helps us gain a more rational understanding of the working of society.
Understanding society is an integral part of gaining perspective and viewing  at
problems differently.  With the comfort of our homes, we often ignore the larger
problems, however, this course helped me understand the problems  borne  out  of
differences in society.  It helped me get a broader view  of  the  society,  and
brought in a sense of judgement regarding the hills and valleys of the	society.
Sociology, as I would say, can	help  people  raise  more  questions,  not	just
regarding  society,  but  also	regarding  their  personal	actions   and	self
interests and how their personal actions are perceived by the  larger  audience.

We mostly do not see the small and regard the problems we see in our daily lives
around us as social problems,  but	more  of  an  individualistic  nature,	thus
forming a large gap between what is social and what  is  personal.	 The  course
helped me understand that  the	problems  we  usually  see	around	us	such  as
patriarchy, woman associated with household, unemployment, discrimination,	etc.
are problems much bigger than the interests of a few individuals, and helped  me
raise	questions	regarding	the   law	and   reforms	of	 our	country.

The discussions risen in the class helped me  understand  the  vastness  of  the
social problems.   We  usually	associate  these  problems	with  illiteracy  or
pre-modern, however my realization is that	these  problems  are  actually	deep
embedded into the workings of our society, and is not bounded by one's education
or intellect, but only by cultural norms.  An excellent example of this would be
the practice of Dowry.	This  also	brings	a  point  that	pre-modern	cultural
practices are held in the modern  society  without	consideration  of  the	real
reasons for which these practices were started, but only seen as things we	must
perform.

The course provides us with a bird eye view of the society, however it	is	upto
us to really understand the depths of society and how it affects us in our daily
life.
