In this assignment, we will experiment with a few scheduling algorithms in NachOS. In the first
part of the assignment, you will incorporate a way to submit a batch of jobs to NachOS at time zero.
The second part explores the scheduling algorithms. The batch submission component will be needed
to evaluate the performance of the scheduling algorithms.

Download cs330assignment2.zip and unzip it in your home directory. This will create a new directory
named cs330assignment2/ and place my version of NachOS under it.

If you plan to continue using your submission from the last assignment, you need to do the following.

1. Please copy the contents of the ~/cs330assignment2/nachos/code/test/ directory into your test directory. 
2. Please set NumPhysPages to 512 in machine.h. 
3. You may have to change the following line in Makefile to point to the correct path for the MIPS cross-compiler.
GCCDIR = ~/cs330assignment2/mips-i386-xgcc/bin/

-------------------------
BATCH SUBMISSION OF JOBS
-------------------------

Modify nachos/code/threads/main.cc so that it can accept a new option -F followed by a plain text file as follows.

> ./nachos -F filename

The plain text file contains several lines, where each line specifies an executable user program name followed
by an optional priority value of the job. The priority value must be an integer between 0 and 100 (both inclusive). A higher priority value
signifies a lower priority (as in UNIX). If a priority value for a job is not mentioned, a default priority value
of 100 is assumed. The file contents may look like the following.

../test/printtest 90
../test/vectorsum 50
../test/forkjoin
../test/testloop 60
../test/testloop
../test/vectorsum 70

NachOS reads this file, creates one thread corresponding to each specified executable, and enqueues it in the
ready queue. After enqueuing all jobs in the ready queue, it invokes the scheduler to start the execution.
At this point the main thread may exit. Every thread in the system must do a clean exit. In other
words, when your main thread exits, it must update the relevant data structures with this information so that 
when a child exits later it doesn't think that the parent hasn't exited yet. The easiest thing to do is to
execute the SysCall_Exit code for the main thread after it has created all the children. Assume an exit code 
of zero for the main thread.

You should always compile and run NachOS from the nachos/code/userprog directory, as you did in the last assignment.
The code, as provided, may not compile from the nachos/code/threads/ directory.

----------------------
SCHEDULING ALGORITHMS
----------------------

NachOS implements a non-preemptive scheduling algorithm if the timer is off. In this assignment, we will
experiment with the following algorithms: non-preemptive algorithm of NachOS, non-preemptive shortest next 
CPU burst first algorithm with an exponentially averaged CPU burst estimation, a preemptive fixed quantum 
round-robin scheduling algorithm, and a UNIX-like preemptive priority scheduling algorithm. The first 
three algorithms will ignore the priority values of the processes. In all evaluations, we will use the 
testloop.c, testloop1.c, testloop2.c, testloop3.c programs, which run several iterations of the vectorsum 
loop with either no I/O burst or a short I/O burst in each iteration. We will evaluate each algorithm in 
terms of CPU utilization and average wait time in the ready queue. You will submit four different batches 
of programs to NachOS. Each batch will contain ten copies of one of the four testloop programs i.e., the 
first batch will have ten copies of testloop, the second will have ten copies of testloop1, the third will 
have ten copies of testloop2, and the fourth will have ten copies of testloop3. We will refer to these as 
Batch1, Batch2, Batch3, and Batch4.

To decide the fixed quantum in the last two algorithms, first get an estimate of the CPU burst lengths in
the testloop.c program. This can be done by running a copy of this program on NachOS in the presence of its
non-preemptive scheduling algorithm and measuring the ticks between I/O operations. Next, take the average
of these burst lengths. Let this average be A. Evaluate the algorithms for three different quanta: one-fourth, 
half, and three-fourth of A. Let these three quanta be Q1, Q2, and Q3. Next, find out the minimum value of 
the quantum that offers the maximum achievable CPU utilization for testloop. Call this Q4. The minimum quantum 
length that you are allowed to use for this assignment is twenty ticks. You will use this set of four quantum 
values to evaluate the round-robin and UNIX scheduling algorithms on the four batches. Note that you should not 
be recomputing A and Q1, Q2, Q3, Q4 for each of the batches. All batches must be evaluated using the same set 
of four quanta that you determine through testloop.c program.

For the UNIX scheduler, submit the ten jobs with equal priority value of 70 in each batch. This priority value is added to the
base priority value of 50 at time zero. On each context switch, the priority values of all jobs are updated as in the 
UNIX scheduler (see the worked out example in Maurice Bach's book on page 253 as depicted in Figure 8.4 of Chapter 8).
The CPU usage is measured in terms of ticks.

The first line of your input text file should be a positive integer indicating which scheduling algorithm to simulate.
The mapping between the scheduling algorithms and positive integers is discussed below.

You must make sure that your NachOS simulation prints at least the following statistics at the end. You are welcome
to provide more statistics, if they are useful; otherwise please do not clutter the output.

o Total CPU busy time
o Total execution time
o CPU utilization
o Maximum, minimum, average CPU burst length (considering only the non-zero bursts)
o Number of non-zero CPU bursts observed
o Average waiting time in the ready queue
o Maximum, minimum, average, and variance of thread completion times (exclude the main thread's completion time from these statistics)

--------------------------
FEW FACTS TO KEEP IN MIND
--------------------------

1. For non-preemptive scheduling, you should not do a context switch on timer interrupts. There are
two ways to do this. The simple, but naive, solution is not to invoke the Timer constructor if
the simulated algorithm is non-preemptive. This is a bad solution because it doesn't allow you to
use any of the timer related calls in the user program (this is not a problem for the test programs
provided to you for this assignment). A better solution is to construct a timer, but not to call
YieldOnReturn in the timer interrupt handler if the simulated algorithm is non-preemptive.

2. For this assignment, we will define a CPU burst to be the time for which a thread remains in 
the RUNNING state before transitioning to READY state (in the case of a preemptive context switch 
due to quantum expiry) or BLOCKED state (in the case of a non-preemptive context switch due to a 
blocking system call). This could be used for measuring the CPU burst lengths. However, you are free 
to come up with any other correct ways of measuring the CPU burst lengths. CPU utilization is the sum 
of all CPU burst lengths over the total execution time. Note that this definition of CPU utilization is
somewhat wrong because it implicitly assumes that the CPU is not utilized outside the observed CPU bursts
of the submitted processes. This is not correct because even during context switches, the CPU is utilized
for kernel activities. Therefore, it is probably safe to say that this definition of CPU utilization
only keeps track of CPU utilization due to user programs. Even if it does not reflect the correct
CPU utilization, we will stick to this definition for this assignment. The first CPU burst starts when 
the main thread's state is set to RUNNING. This is the starting time of the simulation as well. The 
simulation finishes when Halt() is called. You should not include zero-length CPU bursts as legitimate 
CPU bursts. They should not be used in your burst estimation algorithms. You should always use 
stats->totalTicks for measuring the length of the CPU bursts and all other timing stats such as waiting time, etc..

3. When setting the quantum length to 1/4, 1/2, 3/4th of average quantum, make sure to set the timer interval to match
the quantum length. Also, when you experiment with the quantum length that maximizes the CPU utilization, set the timer
interval to match the quantum length. Please make sure to mention these quantum lengths in your report so that we can
properly test your submission.

4. We are interested only in the waiting time in the ready queue. Be careful not to include the time spent by
a thread in BLOCKED state. During this time the thread is not waiting in the ready queue.

5. Depending on the setting of the timer interrupt interval, the scheduling quantum, and the start time of
a CPU burst, it may happen that the quantum expiry time does not coincide with the time when the timer interrupt
comes. This will be a very common situation. You need to check on every timer interrupt, if the on-going
CPU burst length is at least the quantum length. If yes, you should do a context switch. The upshot is that
certain CPU bursts may exceed the quantum, but the maximum overshoot is bounded by the timer interrupt
interval. A nice way of checking this is to print out the maximum and minimum CPU burst lengths.

6. The scheduling quantum in a preemptive scheduling algorithm must always be positive.

7. You should use 0.5 for the value of `a' in the burst estimation algorithm. Remember that
the length of the next burst for each thread must be estimated independently. If you use some
other value of `a', you must document clearly the reason for that in your assignment
report.

8. Regarding the UNIX scheduler:

(i) A process comes with an initial priority value. This priority value should be added
to the default base priority value (50) to calculate the new base priority value for
this process. This new base priority value should be used in all subsequent
calculations of priority value for this process. For example, if a process comes
with an initial priority value of 70, its base priority value will be 120 and the
priority value of this process will never go below 120. On each context switch,
the new priority value should be updated as in the UNIX scheduler assuming 120 as
the base priority value. The initial priority value of a process serves the purpose of
the nice value. The initial priority value of the main thread can be assumed to be zero for
this assignment.

(ii) The CPU usage and priority values of all active threads (i.e., those which haven't
called exit yet) are updated on every context switch (i.e., when the currently running thread
moves out of the RUNNING state). Some of the threads may be waiting in the ready queue,
while some others may be blocked on some event or I/O. The UNIX scheduler does not update the
priorities of the threads that are not in the ready queue, but in this assignment, we will ignore
this fact and update the priorities of all the threads. Remember that a context switch
can happen due to two reasons: expiry of quantum (preemptive context switch) and
a blocking system call (non-preemptive context switch). Just like you ignore the zero-length
CPU bursts in burst estimation, you should not update the priority value and usage of any thread if
the currently concluded CPU burst was of length zero.

(iii) The currently running thread remains eligible for scheduling in the next quantum as well.
So, remember to update the priority values of all threads including the one which has just completed
its quantum before selecting the next thread.

(iv) For this assignment, you do not have to apply any additional rules to boost the priority of a thread
when returning from sleep or when entering the kernel mode from user mode. You also do not need to
increase the priority value of a thread when returning from kernel mode to user mode. These are normally
found in a UNIX scheduler, but we will keep things simple and only update the priority values as discussed
in (ii) above.

9. It may happen that there is no thread in the ready queue and the current thread
yields and is executed again. Even in this case, at the yield point you will break its CPU
burst and count these as two different CPU bursts.

---------------
WHAT TO SUBMIT
---------------

[PART I] For each of the four batches (Batch1, Batch2, Batch3, Batch4), prepare two tables, one for CPU 
utilization and one for average wait time in ready queue. Each table should report the results for the 
following ten scheduling policies.

1. Non-preemptive default NachOS scheduling
2. Non-preemptive shortest next CPU burst first algorithm
3, 4, 5, 6. Round-robin with three different quanta and the minimum quantum that maximizes CPU utilization
7, 8, 9, 10. UNIX scheduler with three different quanta and the minimum quantum that maximizes CPU utilization

Put these tables along with explanations in a pdf document. Name the pdf file groupX.pdf (replace X by your assigned 
group id). Remember to mention the quantum lengths used in the cases 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 above.
Explain why you think the minimum value of quantum that you have got for maximum CPU utilization should actually 
maximize the utilization. Mention any downside of using such a quantum value.

[PART II] For evaluating the difference between the two non-preemptive algorithms, use testloop4 and testloop5 programs. 
The primary difference between these two programs is that the inner loop size of testloop5 is smaller compared to testloop4. 
Prepare a batch of ten jobs such that the first five jobs are testloop4 and the last five jobs are testloop5. We will refer 
to this batch as Batch5. For this batch, report the average waiting time in the ready queue for the two non-preemptive 
algorithms. Explain your results. Include these results and explanations in the pdf document.

[PART III] For all the five batches, report the overall estimation error in CPU bursts for the second non-preemptive 
algorithm. This is how you should compute the error: Compute the absolute value of the error in CPU burst estimation 
at the end of each non-zero burst. Accumulate these into a single sum. Report the ratio of this sum to the sum total 
of all CPU bursts. The smaller this number, the better is the estimation. What happens to this ratio if you increase
the OUTER_BOUND in the test programs used to prepare these batches? Explain your observation. Include these results 
and explanations in the pdf document.

[PART IV] For evaluating the difference between round-robin and the UNIX scheduling algorithms, prepare a batch of 
ten testloop.c jobs. We will refer to this batch as Batch6. Assign priority values to these jobs in the order 100, 90, ..., 10. 
Set the quantum length and timer interval both to 100. Report the maximum, minimum, average, and variance of job completion 
times (exclude the main thread's completion time from these statistics) for this batch running with round-robin and the 
UNIX scheduling algorithms. Explain your results. Completion time of a thread is defined as the value of totalTicks 
when the thread calls exit. Include these results and explanations in the pdf document.

Execute make clean in the threads and userprog directories. Prepare the submission zip ball of
your machine/, threads/, and userprog/ directories.

> cd nachos/code/
> zip -r groupX.zip machine/ threads/ userprog/

Replace X by your assigned group id. Send an email to
cs330autumn2017@gmail.com with subject "[CS330] Assignment2" and attach
groupX.zip and groupX.pdf to the mail. The body of the mail should contain the following
two sentences.

1. I have not copied any part of this submission from any other group.
2. I have not helped any other group copy any part of this submission.

All the members of the group should put their names and roll numbers below the
statement.

------------------------
PUNISHMENT FOR CHEATING
------------------------

Please refer to the section on academic integrity on course web page.
